.\"
.\"   otpasswd(1) - One-Time Password Authentication System
.\"
.\"   Copyright (c) 2010 Tomasz bla Fortuna
.\"
.\"   This file is part of OTPasswd.
.\"
.\"   OTPasswd is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"   it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published
.\"   by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License,
.\"   or any later version.
.\"
.\"   OTPasswd is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\"   WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"   MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"   GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"   You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"   along with OTPasswd.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\"   Author:  R Hannes Beinert & Tomasz bla Fortuna
.\"   Version: otpasswd v0.7beta
.\"   Update:  15-Sep-10
.\"
.TH OTPASSWD 1 2010-09-15 "OTPasswd v0.7beta" "OTPasswd User Manual"
.\"
.SH NAME
agent_otp \- One-time password agent
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B agent_otp
[\fIoptions\fR]
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIotpasswd\fR agent serves as the backend for otpasswd utility.
To enhance security in the version 0.7, the utility was split into agent,
and its interface - the utility.
.PP
In general user never directly interacts with the agent, although it should
be noted that agent is executed each time user runs the utility.
.PP
That said, agent has a limited interface used solely for diagnostics. 
You can use it when you're logged as root or then agent is not a SUID binary.
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\--testcase\fR
Run set of internal testcases, which validates for example randomness of generated
passcodes.
.\"
.TP
\fB\--check-config\fR
Diagnose any errors inside config file.
.\"

.SH SECURITY NOTES
This executable is the only part of \fBOTPasswd\fR which might have SUID bit enabled.
That said it's vital that this program was written and tested correctly. 


.SH SEE ALSO
\fBotpasswd\fR(1),
\fBotpasswd\fR(7),
\fBpam_otpasswd\fR(8),
\fBotpasswd.conf\fR(5),
\fBotshadow\fR(5),
\fBotpasswd\fR(5)
.\"
.SH DOCUMENTATION
The documentation for \fBotpasswd\fR is also maintained as a Texinfo manual.
If the \fBinfo\fR and \fBotpasswd\fR programs are properly installed at your
site, the following command should give you access to the manual:
.PP
.ti +4m
$ info otpasswd
.PP
In addition to this manual, various other documents are included with the
source to this package.
Depending upon the \fBOTPasswd\fR package that was installed,
these documents may be available in the /usr/share hierarchy of your system.
.PP
An excellent description of PPPv3 is available on the Gibson Research Corporation
website at <https://www.grc.com/ppp.htm>.
.PP
The evolving design of \fIPerfect Paper Passwords\fR was discussed extensively
by Steve Gibson and Leo LaPorte on the TWiT \fISecurity Now!\fR netcast in
episodes #113, #115, and #117 during the fall of 2007.
.PP
The GRC \fIgrc.thinktank\fR newsgroup was the site of a great deal of
activity regarding the design and development of \fIPerfect Paper Passwords\fR
during this same time period.
Quite a number of developers posted articles, as did Steve Gibson, himself.
More information regarding GRC newsgroups is available at
<http://www.grc.com/discussions.htm>.
To view the \fIgrc.thinktank\fR newsgroup itself, point your favorite
NNTP newsreader at <news://news.grc.com/grc.thinktank>.
.\"
.\"  *AUTHORS
.\"
.SH LICENSE
Copyright (c) 2009, 2010 Tomasz bla Fortuna
.PP
This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
.PP
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program in a LICENSE file.
.\"
.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest version of the \fBOTPasswd\fR package is available in source form
at the project website
.nh
https://savannah.nongnu.org/projects/otpasswd
.hy 1
.\"
.\" End of Manual: otpasswd(1)
