.\"
.\"   otpasswd(1) - One-Time Password Authentication System
.\"
.\"   Copyright (c) 2010 Tomasz bla Fortuna
.\"
.\"   This file is part of OTPasswd.
.\"
.\"   OTPasswd is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"   it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published
.\"   by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License,
.\"   or any later version.
.\"
.\"   OTPasswd is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\"   WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"   MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"   GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"   You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"   along with OTPasswd.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.\"
.\"   Author:  R Hannes Beinert & Tomasz bla Fortuna
.\"   Version: otpasswd v0.7beta
.\"   Update:  15-Sep-10
.\"
.TH OTPASSWD 1 2010-09-15 "OTPasswd v0.7beta" "OTPasswd User Manual"
.\"
.SH NAME
otpasswd \- One-time password management utility
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B otpasswd
[\fIoptions\fR]
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIotpasswd\fR utility serves as the primary management tool
for the \fBOTPasswd\fR one-time password authentication package
for both users and administrators.
It allows the user to generate a key, print passcards,
and manage various configuration options.
.PP
In general, once \fBOTPasswd\fR has been installed,
the system administrator must determine where the system will keep
the user configuration data (user state).
The administrator will likely also configure the system by making various
policy choices,
such as how long passcodes must be, how complicated the static password should be,
which passcode alphabet will be used, etc.
Subsequently, users will probably also make some configuration choices
\- to the degree they are permitted by policy \-
and then they will generate a key and print some passcards.
All of these activities involve the use of the \fBotpasswd\fR(1) utility.
Once this initial configuration is complete,
the \fBOTPasswd\fR system will operate virtually autonomously.
Each time a user attempts to login to the system,
or otherwise authenticate with some service which uses
the \fBpam_otpasswd\fR(8) module,
the previously configured data is consulted,
a one-time passcode challenge will be issued,
and the user will have a chance to authenticate.
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
.SS User Administration
.TP
\fB\-k\fR, \fB\-\-key\fR
Generate a new key.
May be combined with the \fB\-\-config\fR (\fB\-c\fR) option.
If the user already has state information present,
\fBotpasswd\fR can either use the system default user state configuration,
or it can continue to use the the previously configured user state.
In this situation, the user is asked to express a preference.
Regardless, the user configuration may subsequently be modified through the
use of option flags to the \fBotpasswd\fR utility.
Once key generation is complete and the user state has been prepared,
\fBotpasswd\fR prints the first passcard and waits until the user
has made a note of the first few passcodes.
.\"
.TP
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-\-remove\fR
Remove user state.
This completely removes any existing user configuration.
Note that if system policy requires \fBOTPasswd\fR use,
this action will effectively disable the user's login.
Furthermore, if policy also prohibits user key generation,
only the administrator will be able to restore access.
.\"
.SS Passcard Printing
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-text\fR ( \fIcard\fR | \fIcode\fR )
Generate either one ASCII passcard, or a single passcode.
.\"
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-latex\fR ( \fIcard\fR | \fIcode\fR )
Generate six (6) LaTeX passcards beginning with the specified passcard.
.\"
.SS Miscellaneous Passcode Operations
.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-prompt\fR ( \fIcard\fR | \fIcode\fR )
Display authentication prompt for the specified passcode.
.\"
.TP
\fB\-a\fR, \fB\-\-authenticate\fR \fIpasscode\fR
Attempt authentication with the actual passcode specified.
This might be used for testing or scripted authentication.
.\"
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-skip\fR ( \fIcard\fR | \fIcode\fR )
Skip forward to a specific point in the passcode sequence.
The next authentication will request either the specified passcode,
or the first passcode on the specified passcard.
.\"
.TP
\fB\-w\fR, \fB\-\-warning\fR
Display any current warnings.
For example, if the user is currently on the last printed passcard.
It is useful to include this option in the user shell start-up commands
to stay informed of any \fBOTPasswd\fR system conditions which may
affect the user's ability to login.
.\"
.SS Configuration
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-info\fR
Display current user state configuration.
.\"
.TP
\fB\-\-info-key\fR
Display private sequence key and passcode counter.
.\"
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-config\fR \fIitem\fR
Set various flags which regulate \fBOTPasswd\fR system behavior:
.RS
.RS +4m
.TP +8m
\fBshow=\fR( \fIon\fR | \fIoff\fR )
Configure passcode visibility during authentication.
.TP +8m
\fBalphabet=\fR( \fIID\fR | \fIlist\fR )
Sets the \fIID\fR of the alphabet to be used.
The \fIlist\fR keyword may be used to display
a list of all available alphabets.
By default, a 64-character alphabet is used.
.TP +8m
\fBcodelength=\fR\fIlength\fR
Set the number of passcode characters to \fIlength\fR.
\fIlength\fR may be any value between 2 and 16.
Four (4) character passcodes are used by default.
.TP +8m
\fBsalt=\fR( \fIon\fR | \fIoff\fR )
Meaningful only during key generation.
Enables or disables salting of the passcode counter.
Setting this option to \fIoff\fR will make \fBOTPasswd\fR
compatible with the PPPv3.1 specification.
This has the additional consequence of increasing the number
of available passcards while (theoretically) lowering the
security of the system.
.TP +8m
\fBdisable=\fR( \fIon\fR | \fIoff\fR )
Disable the user.
Unlike \fB--remove\fR, this will \fInot\fR delete the user's state information.
.TP +8m
\fBcontact=\fR\fIstring\fR
Set contact information to \fIstring\fR.
This is used when passcodes are sent via an out-of-band channel.
The exact interpretation of \fIstring\fR will depend on the user configuration,
but could be a phone number, IM username, email address, etc.
Use an empty string ("") to unset this value.
.TP +8m
\fBlabel=\fR\fItitle\fR
Set a title for the generated passcards.
This will be displayed at the top of every passcard.
Use an empty string ("") to clear this value,
in which case the current hostname will be used by default.
.RE
.RE
.\"
.TP
\fB\-p, \fB\-\-password[=\fR\fIpassword\fR]
Set the static password. Argument is optional,
if not given otpasswd will ask you for password in a secure manner.
Enter twice the empty password to delete it.
.\"
.TP
\fB\-u\fR, \fB\-\-user\fR ( \fIusername\fR | \fIUID\fR )
Specify the user account upon which to operate.
Normal users may only change their own account, while the superuser may
change any account with this option.
Either a symbolic \fIusername\fR or a numeric \fIUID\fR may be specified.
(Administrator only)
.\"
.SS General
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Display more information about program operation. 
Use twice for even more information.
.\"
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fR
Display license, warranty, version and author information.
.\"
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Program usage and option help information.
.\"
.TP
\fB\-\-check\fR
Obsolete option, moved to the agent_otp executable.
.\"
.SS Parameter References
When an option accepts a passcode reference (\fIcode\fR),
it can be specified in any of the following ways:
.PD 0
.RS +4m
.TP +10m
#
Passcode number.
Each passcode has a unique decimal number,
starting with the first passcode generated.
.TP +10m
RRC\fB[\fR#\fB]\fR
.TP +10m
CRR\fB[\fR#\fB]\fR
Passcode address.
Each passcode has a unique address comprised of the
column \fIC\fR (a letter) and row \fIRR\fR (one or more digits) on a
specific passcard number (\fI#\fR).
For example, 'F3[45]' refers to the passcode at column \fIF\fR
and row \fI3\fR of passcard \fI45\fR.
.TP +10m
\fBcurrent\fR
The passcode which will be used for the next authentication.
.RE
.PD
.\"
Passcard references (\fIcard\fR) may be specified as follows:
.PD 0
.RS +4m
.TP +10m
\fB[\fR#\fB]\fR
Passcard number.
.TP +10m
\fB[current]\fR
The passcard containing the current passcode.
.TP +10m
\fB[next]\fR
The first unprinted passcard.
Brackets are optional.
.RE
.PD
.\"
.SH SECURITY NOTES
This section needs to be completed (FIXME).
Until this section is written, see the docs/security file which
is distributed with the \fBOTPasswd\fR sources.
.\"
.SH EXIT STATUS
\fBotpasswd\fR will return zero on success and non-zero on failure.
This can be used for scripting
(e.g. see the \fB\-\-authenticate\fR/\fB\-a\fR option).
.\"
.\"   RETURN VALUE       [Normally only in Sections 2, 3]
.\"   ERRORS             [Typically only in Sections 2, 3]
.\"   ENVIRONMENT
.\"
.SH FILES
.TP
/etc/otpasswd
The directory for \fBOTPasswd\fR configuration files.
If \fBOTPasswd\fR is configured to use a global flat-file
database, then this file resides here, also.
The directory should be owned by the special \fIotpasswd\fR
system user,
and should not be accessible for normal users (mode 0700).
.\"
.TP
/etc/otpasswd/otpasswd.conf
The main \fBOTPasswd\fR system configuration file.
This file contains key-value configuration parameters that
govern the operation of the system.
In particular, it contains the state database configuration,
system-wide defaults, PAM configuration and policy configuration.
When the backend user database is configured to use MySQL or LDAP,
this file will contain privileged information and
must be not be accessible for normal users.
.\"
.TP
/etc/otpasswd/otshadow
The system-wide user database, used only when the \fBotpasswd.conf\fR(5)
configuration file specifies the use of a global database backend.
The file contains state information for all users,
including keys, flags, etc, and must not be accessible
to normal users.
.\"
.TP
$HOME/.otpasswd
This file is only used when the system configuration file
\fBotpasswd.conf\fR(5) specifies that state information is
to be maintained in user home directories.
This has the same format as the \fBotshadow\fR(5) file above,
except it only contains information for a single user.
.\"
.TP
/etc/pam.d/otpasswd_login
The PAM prototype configuration for \fBOTPasswd\fR.
If this file is \fIinclude\fRd in a PAM configuration for any
service (like \fBSSH\fR), the \fBpam_otpasswd\fR(8) PAM module will be
used to ask the user for a passcode just after the normal \fBpam_unix\fR(8)
authentication mechanisms are applied.
.\"
.TP
/lib/security/pam_otpasswd.so
The \fBOTPasswd\fR system PAM module.
This module is dynamically loaded by \fBPAM\fR(7) when an \fBOTPasswd\fR
one-time password authentication has been configured.
Various runtime options exist for this module to modify
operation.  For more information, see \fBpam_otpasswd\fR(8).
.\"
.\"   VERSIONS           [Normally only in Sections 2, 3]
.\"
.SH COMPATIBILITY
The \fBOTPasswd\fR authentication system is compatible with the
"Perfect Paper Passwords" specification version 3 (PPPv3) as
developed by the Gibson Research Corporation.
See DOCUMENTATION, below.
.PP
Note that for \fBOTPasswd\fR to operate in a manner which is
strictly compatible with PPPv3, it is important to specify
the \fB\-\-config salt=no\fR option during key generation.
A compatible key will generate passcards and passcodes
which are interoperable with other PPPv3-compliant applications.
For a list of such applications, see
<http://www.grc.com/ppp/software.htm>.
.PP
\fBOTPasswd\fR does \fInot\fR support any earlier versions
of the PPP specification.
.\"
.\"   CONFORMING TO
.\"   NOTES
.\"   BUGS
.\"
.SH EXAMPLES
Every user must generate a key in order to use \fBOTPasswd\fR.
Depending on the value of the \fBSALT_DEF\fR parameter in the
\fBotpasswd.conf\fR(5) file, a cryptographic salt may be used
to generate the passcode counter by default.
The use of a salt may also be affected by the \fBsalt\fR parameter
to the \fBotpasswd\fR \fB\-\-config\fR option.
A salted key is not compatible with the PPPv3 specification, however.
To generate a new salted key and print the first passcard, use:
.PP
.ti +4m
$ otpasswd \-\-config salt=on \-\-key
.PP
To inspect the current user state configuration, which contains
information relating to the passcode length, contact information,
passcode alphabet choice, passcard label, etc, 
you may use the following command:
.PP
.ti +4m
$ otpasswd \-\-info
.PP
Typically, to use the \fBOTPasswd\fR authentication system,
a user will carry a series of passcards to consult during system login.
Specific passcards may be printed in either LaTeX or plain ASCII text.
The '\fB[\fR' character may be a shell metacharacter,
so it may need to be quoted or backslash-escaped.
To print the third passcard in ASCII text, use:
.PP
.ti +4m
$ otpasswd \-\-text '[3]'
.PP
And the current passcard may be printed with:
.PP
.ti +4m
$ otpasswd \-\-text '[current]'
.PP
To configure a passcode length of five (5) characters, use:
.PP
.ti +4m
$ otpasswd \-\-config codelength=5
.PP
The \fB\-\-config\fR option may be used at any time, including during key generation.
.PP
While plain ASCII passcards are perfectly useful,
LaTeX enables much more attractively formatted passcards and
provides an easy approach to printing a few passcards at a time.
One way to efficiently print a LaTeX file is to use the \fIpdflatex\fR
utility from the \fItexlive-latex-base\fR package.
To generate the next six (6) passcards on an A4 page using LaTeX, use:
.PP
.RS +4m
.nf
$ otpasswd \-\-latex next > tmp.latex
$ pdflatex tmp.latex
$ lp tmp.pdf

# Remember to remove any temporary files
# to keep your passcards secret!

$ rm tmp.latex tmp.pdf
.fi
.RE
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBotpasswd\fR(7),
\fBpam_otpasswd\fR(8),
\fBotpasswd.conf\fR(5),
\fBotshadow\fR(5),
\fBotpasswd\fR(5)
\fBagent_otp\fR(1)
.\"
.SH DOCUMENTATION
The documentation for \fBotpasswd\fR is also maintained as a Texinfo manual.
If the \fBinfo\fR and \fBotpasswd\fR programs are properly installed at your
site, the following command should give you access to the manual:
.PP
.ti +4m
$ info otpasswd
.PP
In addition to this manual, various other documents are included with the
source to this package.
Depending upon the \fBOTPasswd\fR package that was installed,
these documents may be available in the /usr/share hierarchy of your system.
.PP
An excellent description of PPPv3 is available on the Gibson Research Corporation
website at <https://www.grc.com/ppp.htm>.
.PP
The evolving design of \fIPerfect Paper Passwords\fR was discussed extensively
by Steve Gibson and Leo LaPorte on the TWiT \fISecurity Now!\fR netcast in
episodes #113, #115, and #117 during the fall of 2007.
.PP
The GRC \fIgrc.thinktank\fR newsgroup was the site of a great deal of
activity regarding the design and development of \fIPerfect Paper Passwords\fR
during this same time period.
Quite a number of developers posted articles, as did Steve Gibson, himself.
More information regarding GRC newsgroups is available at
<http://www.grc.com/discussions.htm>.
To view the \fIgrc.thinktank\fR newsgroup itself, point your favorite
NNTP newsreader at <news://news.grc.com/grc.thinktank>.
.\"
.\"  *AUTHORS
.\"
.SH HISTORY
The creation of this program was inspired by the \fBppp\-pam\fR project
(http://code.google.com/p/ppp\-pam).
The idea is basically the same.
Initially, contributions were made to \fBppp\-pam\fR,
however ultimately it was decided to do a complete rewrite.
The two projects share some code, such as locking functions, but nothing more.
It would be reasonable to think of \fBOTPasswd\fR as a fork of \fBppp\-pam\fR.
.\"
.SH LICENSE
Copyright (c) 2009, 2010 Tomasz bla Fortuna
.PP
This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
.PP
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program in a LICENSE file.
.\"
.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest version of the \fBOTPasswd\fR package is available in source form
at the project website
.nh
https://savannah.nongnu.org/projects/otpasswd
.hy 1
.\"
.\" End of Manual: otpasswd(1)
