.\"
.\"   pam_otpasswd(8) - One-Time Password Authentication System
.\"
.\"   Copyright (c) 2010 Tomasz bla Fortuna
.\"
.\"   This document is licensed under some as-yet to-be-determined
.\"   Anti-Draconian licensing scheme.  Stay tuned.
.\"
.\"   Author:  R Hannes Beinert & Tomasz bla Fortuna
.\"   Version: otpasswd v0.5beta
.\"   Update:  04-Jan-10
.\"
.\"
.TH PAM_OTPASSWD 8 2010-01-04 "OTPasswd v0.5beta" "OTPasswd User Manual"
.\"
.SH NAME
pam_otpasswd \- Module for OTPasswd one-time password authentication
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
pam_otpasswd.so [\fIoptions\fR]
.\"
.\"  CONFIGURATION      [Normally only in Section 4]
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
This module allows the authentication of one-time passwords
with the \fBOTPasswd\fR system.
\fBOTPasswd\fR consists of two primary components, this PAM module
and the \fBotpasswd\fR(1) utility.
The utility is used to control the operation of the system,
and the PAM module essentially makes it happen.
.PP
In general, once \fBOTPasswd\fR has been installed,
the system administrator must determine where the system will keep
the user configuration data (user state).
The administrator will likely also configure the system by making various
policy choices,
such as how long passcodes must be, how often keys should be changed,
which passcode alphabet will be used, etc.
Subsequently, users will probably also make some configuration choices
\- to the degree they are permitted by policy \-
and then they will generate a key and print some passcards.
All of these activities involve the use of the \fBotpasswd\fR(1) utility.
Once this initial configuration is complete,
the \fBOTPasswd\fR system will operate virtually autonomously.
Each time a user attempts to login to the system,
or otherwise authenticate with some service which uses this module,
the previously configured data is consulted,
a one-time passcode challenge will be issued,
and the user will have a chance to authenticate.
.PP
The \fBPAM\fR(7) authentication system supports four independent management
groups, of which this module only supports two:
\fBauth\fRentication management and \fBsession\fR management.
The \fBaccount\fR and \fBpassword\fR management groups are not supported.
.PP
In typical usage,
the \fBauth\fRentication component of the \fBpam_otpasswd\fR module
performs the task of issuing a challenge to the user for a one-time passcode,
validating it against the user state information, and advancing the
counter to the next passcode for subsequent authentications.
Other more advanced tasks involve the validation of the user's
\fIstatic password\fR and accepting some simple authentication-related
commands, such as sending a passcode to the user by text message (SMS).
.PP
The \fBsession\fR component of this module is primarily intended to
provide the user with warnings of unusual \fBOTPasswd\fR system
conditions when a user session is initially established
(see \fBotpasswd\fR(1) for more details).
(FIXME: verify previous)
This module's session management functions will never cause a
user session to be denied.
.PP
The \fBpam_otpasswd\fR module may optionally be provided with a
series of options in the PAM configuration file
(see EXAMPLE section below),
each of which may alter the behavior of some components of the
module.
Any legal options which have no relevance to the specific management
context in which this module is called will be silently ignored.
Unrecognized options will be logged as errors through \fBsyslog\fR(3).
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
.TP +4m
\fBdebug\fR
Maximize module \fBsyslog\fR(3) logging output.
While this is useful for developers, it is not typically what you want.
.\"
.TP +4m
\fBaudit\fR
Increased amount of logging to the system log.
This option is appropriate for system administrators who
desire to more carefully monitor \fBOTPasswd\fR activity
without excessive log spam.
(FIXME: Good idea, huh?)
.\"
.TP +4m
\fBsilent\fR
No text or messages are sent to the calling program,
and the PAM conversation function is not used.
This option causes the module to behave in the same manner as though the
\fBPAM_SILENT\fR flag had been passed by the application.
.\"
.TP +4m
\fBuse_first_pass\fR
This option is ignored.
.\"
.PP
Invalid arguments are logged with \fBsyslog\fR(3),
but are otherwise ignored.
(FIXME: This is currently not true.
Currently the module returns a \fBPAM_AUTH_ERR\fR)
.\"
.SH MODULE SERVICES PROVIDED
\fBPAM\fR(7) supports four independent management groups, which are implemented as follows:
.PP
.PD 0
.RS
.TP +16m
\fBAuthentication\fR
Supported, except \fBpam_setcred\fR(3)
.TP +16m
\fBSession\fR
Fully supported
.TP +16m
\fBAccount\fR
Not supported
.TP +16m
\fBPassword\fR
Not supported
.RE
.PD
.\"
.\" *SECURITY NOTES
.\"  EXIT STATUS        [Normally only in Sections 1, 8]
.\"
.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP +4m
\fBPAM_SUCCESS\fR
User one-time passcode authentication was successful.
\fBpam_open_session\fR(3) will always return this value.
.TP +4m
\fBPAM_IGNORE\fR
Returned by \fBpam_sm_setcred\fR(3) when any attempt is made to alter
the user's credentials.
.\"
.TP +4m
\fBPAM_AUTH_ERR\fR
One of the following conditions has occurred:
.PD 0
.RS +8m
.IP \(bu +2m
User failed to properly provide the expected passcode
.IP \(bu +2m
\fBOTPasswd\fR use is enforced by policy but user has no configuration
.IP \(bu +2m
A parsing error occurred on the module command line
.IP \(bu +2m
User state information was not successfully locked
.IP \(bu +2m
Passcode counter value could not be incremented
.IP \(bu +2m
Passcode prompt could not be generated
.IP \(bu +2m
Application provided no user response to a passcode query
.IP \(bu +2m
An unforeseen error occurred
.RE
.PD
.\"
.TP +4m
\fBPAM_SERVICE_ERR\fR
\fBOTPasswd\fR system configuration error.
This value is returned when any function in this PAM module is unable
to read the \fBotpasswd.conf\fR(5) system configuration file.
(FIXME: How does this return code translate into the success/failure of the auth stack?)
.\"
.TP +4m
\fBPAM_USER_UNKNOWN\fR
The \fBPAM\fR(7) system is unable to provide this module with the name
of the user for whom authentication has been requested.
See \fBpam_get_user\fR(3) for details.
.\"
.PP
In those situations where an error status was returned to the calling
application, the \fBpam_otpasswd\fR module uses the \fBsyslog\fR(3)
facility to log additional details.
Check your system log.
.\"
.\"  ERRORS             [Typically only in Sections 2, 3]
.\"  ENVIRONMENT
.\"
.SH FILES
.TP
/etc/otpasswd
The directory for \fBOTPasswd\fR configuration files.
If \fBOTPasswd\fR is configured to use a global flat-file
database, then this file resides here, also.
The directory should be owned by the special \fIotpasswd\fR
system user,
and should not be accessible for normal users (mode 0700).
.\"
.TP
/etc/otpasswd/otpasswd.conf
The main \fBOTPasswd\fR system configuration file.
This file contains key-value configuration parameters that
govern the operation of the system.
In particular, it contains the state database configuration,
system-wide defaults, PAM configuration and policy configuration.
When the backend user database is configured to use MySQL or LDAP,
this file will contain privileged information and
must be not be accessible for normal users.
.\"
.TP
/etc/otpasswd/otshadow
The system-wide user database, used only when the \fBotpasswd.conf\fR(5)
configuration file specifies the use of a global database backend.
The file contains state information for all users,
including keys, flags, etc, and must not be accessible
to normal users.
.\"
.TP
$HOME/.otpasswd
This file is only used when the system configuration file
\fBotpasswd.conf\fR(5) specifies that state information is
to be maintained in user home directories.
This has the same format as the \fBotshadow\fR(5) file above,
except it only contains information for a single user.
.\"
.TP
/etc/pam.d/otpasswd_login
The PAM prototype configuration for \fBOTPasswd\fR.
If this file is \fIinclude\fRd in a PAM configuration for any
service (like \fBSSH\fR), the \fBpam_otpasswd\fR(8) PAM module will be
used to ask the user for a passcode just after the normal \fBpam_unix\fR(8)
authentication mechanisms are applied.
.\"
.\"  VERSIONS           [Normally only in Sections 2, 3]
.\" *COMPATIBILITY
.\"  CONFORMING TO
.\"
.SH NOTES
See \fBotpasswd\fR(1) for further information regarding the
\fBOTPasswd\fR one-time password authentication system.
In particular, the reader is directed to the sections entitled
COMPATIBILITY, DOCUMENTATION, and HISTORY.
.\"
.\"  BUGS
.\"
.SH EXAMPLE
A typical PAM \fBauth\fR stack for \fBOTPasswd\fR use would be:
.PP
.RS
.nf
auth      required    pam_tally.so onerr=succeed
auth      required    pam_shells.so
auth      required    pam_nologin.so
auth      required    pam_env.so
auth      requisite   pam_unix.so try_first_pass likeauth nullok

auth      required    pam_otpasswd.so audit
session   optional    pam_otpasswd.so
.fi
.RE
.PP
In this example, the \fIrequisite\fR keyword is used for the \fBpam_unix\fR(8)
module, which means that if the user fails to enter the proper system password,
the entire \fBauth\fR stack will fail immediately.
In particular, this means that the user will never be asked for a
passcode by the \fBpam_otpasswd\fR module.
To change this behavior, merely replace the \fIrequisite\fR keyword,
with the \fIrequired\fR keyword.
This forces the entire \fBauth\fR stack to complete first,
and the user will be asked for a passcode every time,
regardless of whether the user specified the system password correctly.
.PP
Note that the \fIaudit\fR option was specified in the \fBauth\fR configuration
for the \fBpam_otpasswd\fR module above.
This will cause an increased number of messages to be placed in the system log,
allowing system administrators to more
carefully monitor \fBOTPasswd\fR authentication activity.
.PP
This example also highlights the typical way in which \fBpam_otpasswd\fR
is used in the \fBsession\fR management stack.
The primary facility provided by this module's session management
functions is to provide warnings of unusual \fBOTPasswd\fR system
conditions when a user session is initially established
(see \fBotpasswd\fR(1) for more details).
(FIXME: verify previous)
No \fBpam_otpasswd\fR session management function will ever fail.
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBotpasswd\fR(1),
\fBotpasswd.conf\fR(5),
\fBotshadow\fR(5),
\fBotpasswd\fR(5)
.\"
.\" *DOCUMENTATION
.\" *AUTHORS
.\" *HISTORY
.\"
.SH LICENSE
Copyright (c) 2009, 2010 Tomasz bla Fortuna
.PP
This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
.PP
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program in a LICENSE file.
.\"
.SH AVAILABILITY
The latest version of the \fBOTPasswd\fR package is available in
source form at the project website
.nh
https://savannah.nongnu.org/projects/otpasswd
.hy 1
.\"
.\" End of Manual: pam_otpasswd(8)
